New Jews and Old Jews
Narratives of Israel’s Founders and Holocaust Survivors


Essential Questions 
	These are the “big picture questions” that highlight the values at play in the session and the ways in which they may be in tension.


* (How) should Israel’s national narrative position the events of the Holocaust?
* (How) can a group with a shared collective identity absorb newcomers with a distinct identity?




Learning Outcomes
	These are the takeaways that participants will take away with them from the session.


* Familiarity with the basic historical circumstances that led to the founding generation of Israel having an overwhelming Ashkenazi majority
* Understanding some ways in which the identities of Israel’s founders and Holocaust survivors have shaped Israel’s national story
* Ability to articulate multiple stances on the appropriate place of the Holocaust in Israel’s national story




Framing for Facilitators
	

In the build-up to the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948 there were several waves of aliyah - Jewish immigration to the land of Israel (known before 1948 as Palestine). The dominant faction, both demographically and politically, of the generation that founded the State of Israel were those who immigrated from Europe during the first half of the twentieth century, and their children born in the land of Israel. Immediately after the State of Israel was founded, it received a huge influx of immigrants from Europe who had been displaced by the events of the Holocaust.


In this session we will explore the complex social interactions between Israel’s founders and the Holocaust survivors, and the place of Holocaust memory in Israel’s national story. The session invites students to engage with questions of identity from the perspective of Israel’s founders and Holocaust survivors as a gateway to grappling with the identity of Israel’s Ashkenazi elite and its role in the process of the ingathering of the exiles that we’ll explore throughout this curriculum.




Time Score
	This is where you sketch out the timing for your session. An example time score is below:


30 min before
	Set up, arrange materials, print sources
	0:00 - 5:00
	Welcome and Shmooze
	5:00 -20:00
	Community Norms, Spark Question, and Introduction
	20:00 - 35:00
	Part I: Collective Identity
	35:00 - 1:00:00
	Part II: New Jews and Old Jews
	1:00:00 - 1:15:00
	Part III: Commemorating the Holocaust
	1:15:00 - 1:20:00
	Closing
	

________________




Welcome and Shmooze
	



Set the scene: As participants arrive, play background music that connects to today’s topic, such as Halika LeKaysaria (lyrics: Hannah Senesh; music: David Zehavi; vocals: Avaya). The poet, Hannah Senesh is revered in Israeli culture as a martyr - she moved to the Land of Israel from Hungary in 1939, then returned in 1944 to fight against the Nazis, only to be captured, tortured, and executed. The song is regularly sung in Israel on Yom HaShoah (Holocaust Remembrance Day).
	



Community Norms
	

Towards the beginning of the first session of the cohort, you might want to establish some community norms for your cohort. Start by inviting each participant to share briefly about why they decided to join this cohort.


Then suggest to the group some community norms that you’d like to propose. Some recommended community norms include:


* Paying attention to how much space different voices in the room take up, and striving for a conversation in which everybody is a participant and nobody is a spectator
* Responding not reacting - when you have a strong reaction to a source, question, or comment, try to notice and name the response (e.g. “I was really triggered by such-and-such”), and reflect on where it came from (e.g. “I think it might be connected to my having Israeli friends who say...”)
* Defining language (e.g. technical terms, names of historical figures and events) that others in the group may not be familiar with
* Encouraging participants to interrupt with clarification questions when they don’t understand something that has been said - there are no “bad questions”
* Trying on new opinions - throughout this cohort, we’ll be exploring different communities and the various narratives they’re comprised on. It’s okay to test out opinions that surprise you, and it’s okay to change your mind!


Finally, ask students if there are additional community norms that they’d like to propose. Make sure that you have consensus on each of the community norms so that you can refer back to them later.
	



Spark Question
	Before introducing the topic, ask a question that gets participants thinking about the values tension(s) addressed in the session. Have participants share a response to the prompt below - you may want to refer back to the key ideas they generate throughout the session.


Think of a time when you were a newcomer joining an established community. How did it feel? When did you begin to feel like a part of the group?




Introduction
	Set the stage by telling participants the topic of the session, and its essential questions. The primary goals here are to help the participants know what to expect from the session and to frame the discussion with relevant historical context. Below is a brief introduction, which we encourage facilitators to adapt or replace with their own words:


Today, we’re going to kick off our learning about ethnic minorities in Israel by exploring two questions: (how) can a group with a shared identity absorb newcomers with a distinct identity? and (how) should Israel’s national narrative position the events of the Holocaust? In order to begin answering these questions, we’re going to look at the absorption of Holocaust survivors from Europe into Israeli society during the early years of the state. 


The establishment of the State of Israel took place against the backdrop of the end of World War Two and the events of the Holocaust which decimated European Jewry. Immediately after the state was founded, it received a huge influx of Jewish immigrants who had been displaced during the Holocaust. Both the Holocaust survivors who arrived in Israel and the Israeli society that received them were predominantly Ashkenazi - of European heritage. 


At first glance, it might seem strange to open a curriculum on Israel’s ethnic minorities with a discussion of it’s Ashkenazi Jews, who have been over-represented in Israel’s political and cultural leadership throughout its history. The absorption of Holocaust survivors by Israel’s founders sheds light on the identity of Israel’s Ashkenazim today, and raises questions about the role of the Holocaust in Israel’s national story, and it also provides a gateway to understanding the historical and ethical context of Israel’s absorption of other ethnic groups into Israeli society that we’ll meet over the course of these six sessions.


Facilitator’s Note: Before you jump into the source material, you may want to set participants’ expectations about how your learning time will be structured, e.g. by explaining that most of our time will be spent encountering source material and discussing it as a whole group, but with a substantial chunk of time in pairs (chavruta) in the middle.
	



Part I: Collective Identity
	

Instruction: Distribute source sheets.
	

Transition: We’re going to start by going back a few decades. In the build-up to the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948 there were several waves of aliyah - Jewish immigration to the land of Israel (known before 1948 as Palestine). By the 1920s, the new immigrants to the land of Israel vastly outnumbered the small number of Jews already living there. Most of the new arrivals were ideological Zionists from Europe who built a collective identity around their shared dream of an independent Jewish state. We’ll call this group “the founders” because the political leaders who established the State of Israel were the products of this community and its ideas. We start our learning today by exploring how these founders saw themselves.


Source 1: Zionism 2000 Collection, 1920-1960 (2012)
The two images below are photographs from an exhibition, curated by Batsheva Goldman Ida, of iconic graphic arts posters of the Jewish community in British Mandate Palestine and the State of Israel between 1920 and 1960. 


          


Photos by Michal Shmulovich


Facilitator’s Note: Key features of the posters include:
* The portrayal of Jews as soldiers and farmers;
* The uprightness/straight-backed-ness of these Jews;
* The farmers are the same color as the land;
* The colors green and orange/red are the colors of land;
* The soldiers are the largest figures in each image.
The Hebrew slogans read “Shoulder to Shoulder” (left) and “Defend Your Homeland: Enlist” (right).
	

Discussion Questions: 
* What do you notice in these images? Why might that be important?
* What do you see in these posters that tells us something about how the founders perceived themselves?
	

Transition: The founders often referred to themselves (or their ideal selves) as the New Jews, as juxtaposed with the “Old Jews” they left behind in Europe. In the next source, Israeli historian Anita Shapira helps us to understand how the dominant ideology of the founders was shaped in opposition to these negative stereotypes in the 1920s.


Source 2: Anita Shapira, Israel: A History (2012)


Old Judaism seemed aged and ailing, lacking relevance to the new world dawning in the wake of World War One. The old Jew, the Jew of the Diaspora, was depicted as psychologically flawed, physically weak, inclined toward luftgesheftn (lit. “air business,” meaning peddling, acting as middlemen, and engaging in other ephemeral trades), a stranger to nature and anything natural or spontaneous, materialistic and incapable of acting on anything but his or her immediate interests. The new Jew was to be the complete opposite: an ethical, aesthetic person guided by ideals who rebels against a debasing reality; a free, proud individual ready to fight for his or her own and the nation’s honor.


Discussion Questions: 
* What images do Shapira’s description of the “old Jew” bring to mind?
* What does this source suggest about how Israel’s founders might have felt about the mass arrival of Holocaust survivors? How do you imagine that the Holocaust survivors immigrating to Israel felt about joining the Jewish community there?
	

Facilitator’s Note: The notion of the New Jew emerged not only in opposition to the idea of the Old Jew in Europe, but also in synthesis with the emergence of the Nation State. In this sense the New Jew rejected European Judaism but embraced European nationalism.
	



Part II: New Jews and Old Jews
	

Transition: In 1948, the State of Israel was established and, within months, hundreds of thousands of Holocaust survivors immigrated to the nascent Jewish state. Both the survivors and the New Jews who received them had reasons for skepticism toward the other. The next two sources present narratives that give an insight into the complex relationship between the founders and the survivors.


Instruction: In chavruta, read source three and source four, paying attention to the ways in which founders and survivors perceived one another, and considering the questions underneath each source.


Facilitator’s Note: The author of source three, Yair Lapid, is a former journalist and a prominent Israeli politician, currently (as of this writing in August 2021) Israel’s Foreign Minister and Alternate Prime Minister, and slated to become Prime Minister in June 2023. Lapid’s father, Tommy, was also a journalist and a prominent politician in Israel in the 1980s, 90s, and 2000s.
	

Source 3: Yair Lapid, Memories After My Death (2010)
Memories After My Death is a book written in the voice of the author’s father, Yosef “Tommy” Lapid, born Tomislav Lampel in Serbia in 1931, who survived the Budapest ghetto before immigrating to Israel.


An elderly, German-speaking Jewish Agency clerk placed a table on the pier and began registering us one by one.
“Name?” he asked me.
“Tomislav Lampel.”
He gave me a bewildered look. “Do you have a Hebrew name as well?” he asked. 
I recalled that Father had once told me that at my birth I had been given the name Joseph, in memory of my grandfather. 
“Joseph,” I told him.
[...]
Two months after I began work [for legendary newspaper editor Azriel Carlebach], we were sitting in his office and he was dictating something when suddenly he raised his eyes.
“What’s the meaning of the name ‘Lampel?’” he asked.
“A lantern, in Hungarian,” I told him.
“You need to change your name,” he said. “You’re a Hebrew journalist, you need a Hebrew name.”
“I’m the last Lampel,” I said. “My uncles have no sons.” 
He looked as though he did not hear me.
“Lapid,” he said. “You need to change your name to Lapid, a torch. It’s close enough in terms of the meaning and they won’t be angry with you.” 
His influence on me was so great that two days later I went to the Ministry of the Interior, waited in line for two hours, and changed my name. Carlebach was right about the name because it was easy to remember, but he was wrong about my uncles: they were so mad at me that they did not speak to me for several long weeks.

Translation: Evan Fallenberg


Chavruta Questions: 
* Why do you think the founders wanted all Israelis to have a Hebrew name? Do you think Tomislav Lampel was right to change his name to Yosef Lapid? Why or why not?
* What does this source suggest about the relationship between the founders and the survivors? How did each group perceive the other?
	

Source 4: Shemi Zarchin, Some Day (2011)
In this scene, Vardina, an old Ashkenazi immigrant to Israel, talks to her younger neighbor Ruchama, an immigrant from Morocco.


Vardina listened carefully, as was her habit, smoked cigarettes and cracked seeds with incredible speed, and said, “Can I tell you something private, Ruchama?” Ruchama nodded and Vardina said, “I have a big problem with all those Holocaust survivors. I can’t stand them.” Ruchama was shocked, even though she was familiar with her neighbor’s statements. “How dare you, Vardina?” she said. “They’re miserable people, human powder, they didn’t see daylight in the camps.”
[...]
“For years I’ve said that it’s a shame they even came here, bringing all of their disease and weakness and spoiling everything,” Vardina continued. “We’d be better off without them.”
Ruchama was mortified again. “I can’t handle you, Vardina, the things you permit yourself to say.”
“I’m Israeli and I’m allowed.”
“You were an immigrant, too.”
“Right,” said Vardina. “But we came here because we wanted to. My mother, God have mercy on her soul, didn’t run away from anything. And they, on the other hand, your human powder, came here because they do whatever they’re told. They were told to go to the camps, so they went. They were told to get into the gas chambers, so they did. They were told to form a line, so they did, and they were shot, and finally they were told to go get their reparation money and they took it, like good kids.”


Translation: Yardenne Greenspan (2013)


Chavruta Questions: 
* How do you feel about Vardina’s attitude about survivors? How might you have responded in Ruchama’s place?
* What does this source suggest about the integration of survivors into Israeli society?
* What do you imagine Tommy Lapid and somebody like Vardina might say to one another? What might they agree about? What might they disagree about?
	

Transition: Bring participants back to form a single group. Invite 2-3 people to share an insight that felt new and important during their time in chavruta.
	

Discussion Question:
* Many Holocaust survivors have related that for more than a decade after they arrived in Israel speaking about their experiences during the Holocaust was taboo. Why do you think it took so long for the narratives of survivors to be heard in Israel?
	



Part III: Commemorating the Holocaust
	

Transition: One important way in which the new State of Israel expressed its national narrative was through its calendar of national holidays. In 1949 and 1950, memorial services for Jewish soldiers who died in the War of Independence were held on Israel’s Independence Day. In 1951, two national memorial days were established - one, to be held the day before Independence Day, would be a memorial day for fallen soldiers; the other, to be held one week earlier, would be a national Holocaust remembrance day. Addressing the Knesset (the Israeli parliament) the chairman of the committee that drafted the Holocaust Remembrance Day law said this:


Source 5: MK Rabbi Mordechai Nurock, Address to the Knesset (1951)


Honorable members of the Knesset, we have seen a graveyard in front of us, a graveyard for six million of our brothers and sisters, and maybe because of their blood, shed like water, we have been privileged to have our state.

Source: Knesset Record, 1st Knesset, 3rd session, 12 April 1951, 1656


Discussion Questions:
* Nurock suggested a direct, causal connection between the events of the Holocaust and the establishment of the state of Israel. How do you think Vardina or Tommy Lapid might have responded to this?
* The official name of the day is Holocaust and Heroism Remembrance Day, and its date was chosen to associate it with the anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising. Both of these choices emphasized Jewish resistance to the Holocaust. Do you think this was a good compromise? Why or why not?
* Together, Israel’s founders and Holocaust survivors formed the backbone of Israeli society, and played central roles in absorbing Jewish immigrants from all over the world. What challenges do you imagine they might have faced in absorbing these newcomers? How can a group with a shared collective identity absorb newcomers with a distinct identity?
	


Closing
	Conclude the session by reminding participants of the essential questions, synthesizing the ideas encountered and discussed, and offering your own insight into the topic as a final thought. Below is an example, which we encourage facilitators to adapt or replace with their own words:


It’s understandable that resolving the tension between the founders and the survivors - the European or Ashkenazi Jews who made up the majority of Israeli citizens in 1949 - was not a top priority. Each group was grappling with its own trauma - the survivors with the traumas of the Holocaust and the need to rebuild their lives from scratch in a new land; the founders with the traumas of the War of Independence, and the need to both absorb the immigrants flowing in from Muslim lands, who we’ll talk about next week, and to subdue the Arab population that had remained in Israel’s borders, who we’ll talk about the following week. In other words, the Israeli leadership had bigger fish to fry.


Speaking about the Holocaust remained taboo in Israel until 1960, when Adolf Eichmann, a major perpetrator of the Holocaust, was kidnapped in Argentina and brought to Israel to stand trial for crimes against humanity and against the Jewish people. The trial was broadcast globally in order to educate the world about the Nazis’ crimes, and Israeli Holocaust survivors felt able to share their experiences publicly for the first time.


Yet, to this day, Israel and Israelis grapple with the legacy of the Holocaust and its place in their national narrative. Since the 1950s, the song that we heard at the beginning of the session, Halikha LeKaysarea (known better as Eli Eli), has been sung at virtually every Holocaust remembrance ceremony in Israel, reflecting the uncomfortable compromise struck among Israel’s Ashkenazim. The events of the Holocaust would be acknowledged, but always with an emphasis on the martyrdom of Jews who fought back against the Nazis. This unhappy compromise, forged in the early years of the state, remains in place, and stands as a reminder of the challenges of absorbing newcomers into Israeli society.


________________




Modalities
	

The source material in this session guide might be used in a multitude of different ways. The above structure focuses on whole group discussion with a substantial chunk of time for chavruta, but we encourage facilitators to consider which modalities and structures work best for their participants. Here are a few different components you might choose to employ:


1. Chavruta: Participants learn and discuss in pairs
2. Chavura: Participants learn and discuss in small groups of four to six people
3. Independent journaling: Provide paper, pens, and a prompt for silent reflection
4. Social barometer: Have participants place themselves on a spectrum (between two extremes) or quadrant (between two pairs of extremes) and invite some to explain their decision
5. Whip-around: All participants answer a question one-by-one, with no interruptions




Facilitation Tips and Tricks
	

Kol Yisrael curricula are built according to a pedagogical approach that elevates the voices of Israelis through the source material, and also centers the voices of learners through discussion. With this in mind, here are three tools (among several!) that we recommend facilitators employ during whole group discussions:


1. Clarification: When a participant offers a confusing or long-winded thought, briefly summarize their key point as you understand it, and check to see that you got it right. This helps other participants to keep those key ideas in mind and gives the speaker an opportunity to clarify, plus it models attentive listening.
2. Synthesis: Look for opportunities to put participants’ ideas in conversation with one another by naming the ways in which they align and diverge. This might generate follow-up questions for the group such as “Which of those ideas do you resonate with more?” or “Can you think of any other approaches?” 
3. Bridging: An important part of your role as facilitator is to know the session’s route from introduction to closing. During discussions, bear in mind what’s coming up and look for opportunities to use a participant’s comment or question to create a bridge to the next phase of the learning.




Authentic Use of Self
	

Think about where there might be moments to insert yourself into your session. Do you have a personal story that embodies the values proposition at stake in this session? Do you have a personal connection to the sources? Sometimes it enlivens the learning experience for participants to know that these things matter to you. Add a “facilitator’s note” at the junction of the session that you want to bring a piece of yourself to the learning.




	

	

	

Created by Mikhael Reuven Kesher, Director of Israel Programs at Harvard Hillel, 
and Lauren Cohen Fisher, Assoc. Director of Israel Education at Hillel U